Course Syllabus for "ENGL002: English Composition II"
-----------------------------------------------------

The ability to research topics and incorporate information from your
sources into your work is an important skill both in college and on the
job.  This course will reinforce the concepts you practiced in English
Composition I by introducing you to basic research concepts and
techniques.  It will also give you a chance to put these new concepts
and techniques to work as you develop a final research paper.  We will
begin by looking at how to build research into an effective writing
process.  First, you will learn to think of researching not as a
requirement for getting a good grade on a paper but as a valuable tool
that can make your writing more powerful and convincing.  You will learn
how to build research into your writing process so that you can add
persuasive power to your finished work.  Through rigorous practice of
the fundamental techniques, you will come to see that, like writing
itself, research is an act of discovery rather than a search for
prefabricated ideas. The intent of this course is to teach you how to
prepare research for any discipline or subject. We will carefully
explore and practice general research techniques and processes that you
should be able to apply to many academic disciplines and in your job. In
Unit 1, you will select a topic that intrigues you, you will conduct
preliminary research to focus your topic, and you will develop a thesis
statement and a set of questions to help guide the remainder of your
research. In Unit 2, you will learn strategies for conducting your
research and taking careful notes.  We will look carefully at
researching on the Internet, but we will also make a point of honing the
skills necessary to research topics in a physical library.  So that you
may begin to make the most of your resources when you start to write, we
will explore some of the techniques that scholars use to record and
organize the information that they plan to include in their work.  By
the end of the unit, you will have completed detailed notes for your own
research project. In Unit 3, you will learn how to evaluate and
understand the sources you located in the previous units.  You will
learn why it is important to put significant effort into reading and
evaluating Internet sources, and you will learn how to identify and what
you need to take into consideration when you use primary and secondary
sources.  You also will get plenty of practice in determining how and
when to use sources to help make your point.  By the end of this unit,
you will start to understand how to determine whether any source is
authoritative, accurate, and current.  You will also have an annotated
bibliography that will guide you through the writing process. In Unit 4,
you will develop your argument and create a detailed outline for your
research paper. We will take some time to reinforce and expand upon the
rhetorical concepts we introduced in Composition I.  Like the
prerequisite course, this unit focuses on how to put your research to
work to strengthen your academic writing.  We will study how to use the
results of your research and analysis to bolster written arguments and
support rhetorical strategies. Unit 5 focuses on how to correctly use
style standards and citation methodology.  The work in this unit will
help you to clearly understand why it is important to document and cite
your sources, and to do so consistently and correctly.  We will closely
examine the issue of plagiarism, noting the situations that can cause
writers to misuse source materials, either consciously or accidentally.
 After completing this unit, you will write a complete draft of your
research paper. Unit 6 prepares you for revising and polishing your
paper. We will provide you with detailed editorial exercises that focus
on specific elements of sentence and paragraph structure, grammar, and
mechanics and which will help you achieve your goal of writing clear,
grammatically-sound expository and persuasive prose. We will use the
Modern Language Association (MLA) standards for citation and formatting.
Please refer to The Saylor Foundation’s [“MLA Style
Resources”](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2011/05/ENGL001-MLA-Style-Resources.pdf) (PDF)
for a cheat sheet to the most useful MLA sites on the Web throughout
this course – and any other course requiring you to write, for that
matter.

### Learning Outcomes

Upon successful completion of this course, you will be able to:

-   define the relationship between research techniques and academic
    work in various disciplines;
-   refine research within a writing process, identifying and using
    rhetorical strategies as well as practicing critical thinking and
    reading;
-   identify the various kinds of research used to produce written work
    in academic disciplines;
-   identify and use tools for conducting Internet-based and library
    research;
-   demonstrate critical and analytical thinking in locating,
    evaluating, and using research;
-   use quotes, paraphrases, and summaries accurately and appropriately
    to strengthen written arguments and to avoid plagiarism;
-   demonstrate skills in source summarization and in synthesis skills;
-   cite and document information sources in accordance with MLA style
    requirements;
-   use information from resources as structural elements in an academic
    paper; and
-   review and practice the grammatical and rhetorical skills necessary
    for successful writing.

### Course Requirements

In order to take this course, you must:  
  
 √    have access to a computer;  
  
 √    have continuous broadband Internet access;  
  
 √    have the ability/permission to install plug-ins and software
(e.g., Adobe Reader or Flash);  
  
 √    have the ability to download and save files and documents to a
computer;  
  
 √    have the ability to open and edit Microsoft Office files and
documents (.doc, .docx, .ppt, .pptx, .xls, .xlsx, etc.);  
  
 √    have competency in the English language;  
  
 √    have read the [Saylor Student
Handbook](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/Saylor-StudentHandbook.pdf);
and  
  
 √    have completed [ENGL001](http://www.saylor.org/courses/engl001/).

### Course Information

Welcome to **ENGL002 English Composition II**. General information on
the course and its requirements can be found below.  
  
 **Course Designers:** Carolyn Tedholm, [Dr. Chelsea L.
Booth](http:www.saylor.org/faculty-a-g/#DrChelseaLBooth) and Carolyn
Savoldy  
  
 **Primary Resources:** This course is comprised of a range of different
free, online materials.  However, the course makes primary use of the
following materials:  

-   Dr. Pavel Zemliansky’s *Methods of Discovery*: *A Guide to Research
    Writing*
-   *[Writing for
    Success](http://www.saylor.org/site/textbooks/Writing%20for%20Success.pdf)*
-   The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill: [Writing Center
    Handouts](http://writingcenter.unc.edu/handouts/)

**Supplementary Resources:** For students using mobile devices, these
two apps (among others) would be useful word processing tools for
writing research papers and other academic reports.

-   RumbleApps’s *[PaperHelper - Easiest Essay
    Writer](https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/paperhelper-easiest-essay/id417344306?mt=8) *(iOS
    App) 
-   Apple’s
    [*Pages *](https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/pages/id361309726?mt=8)(iOS
    App)

  
 **Requirements:** In order to complete this course, you will need to
work through each unit and all of its assigned materials.  The course
builds upon itself from one unit to the next, so it is important to work
thoroughly through each section to understand that which follows.  You
will also need to complete the final exam.  
  
 Note that you will only receive an official grade on your final exam.
 In order to pass this course, you will need to earn a 70% or higher on
the final exam.  Your score on the exam will be tabulated as soon as you
complete it. If you do not pass the exam, you may take it again.  
  
 **Time Commitment:** Completing this course should take approximately
**102.25 hours**. Each unit includes a time advisory that lists the
amount of time you are expected to spend on each subunit. These should
help you plan your time accordingly. It may be useful to take a look at
these time advisories, to determine how much time you have over the next
few weeks to complete each unit, and then to set goals for yourself. For
example, Unit 1 should take approximately 18.5 hours. Perhaps you can
decide to complete subunit 1.1 (a total of 3.5 hours) on Monday night;
subunit 1.2 (a total of 7.75 hours) on Tuesday and Wednesday nights;
etc.  
  
 **Tips for Completion:** It may be helpful to take notes as you work
through the materials in each unit in preparation for the final exam.
Consider posting your responses to any of the exercises within readings
and any of the activities on the Saylor Foundation’s [“ENGL002 Course
Discussion
Board”](http://forums.saylor.org/forum/english/ENGL002/). Also, review
and respond to other students’ postings.

### Preliminary Information

-   **Full Course Download**

    [![ENGL002 Full Course
    Download](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/Logo-Download.png "ENGL002 Full Course Download")](http://saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/ENGL002%20-%20English%20Composition%20II.zip "ENGL002 Full Course Download")  
      
     If you would like to work through this entire course offline, you
    may download the course contents here. All individual resources are
    included in the zipped folder and grouped by units, though you can
    use the provided word doc syllabus (**Course- English Composition II
    Offline.docx**), which contains links directly to the locally hosted
    and downloaded files.  
      
     **Note**: If using a PC, you will have to "extract" the files
    before being able to access the resource folders and syllabus.


